'\" t
.TH JANITOR 1 "2026-04-21" "janitor 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
janitor \- hierarchical Unix permissions manager with snapshots and ACL support
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B janitor
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR]
\fICOMMAND\fR
[\fIPATH\fR]
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B janitor
grants, revokes, audits, and reverts Unix filesystem permissions with a
hierarchical model: granting access to a file also opens the minimum required
traverse-only (\fB\-\-x\fR) bits on every parent directory, so siblings stay
invisible. Every mutating command writes a MessagePack snapshot to
.I /var/lib/janitor/backups
(root) or
.I ~/.local/share/janitor/backups
(non-root) before touching anything, so any change can be reverted exactly with
.BR "janitor restore " ID .
.PP
Symlinks' own permission bits are never modified;
.BR lchown (2)
is used so symlinks are repointed by owner without following them.
.PP
Most subcommands take the target
.I PATH
as a positional argument, followed by options. Short single-letter flags
are provided for the most common options, following the conventions of
.BR chmod (1)
and
.BR chown (1)
(in particular
.BR \-R
for recursive).
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Print what would be done without touching the filesystem. Safe to run as root.
.TP
.BR \-j ", " \-\-json
Emit machine-readable JSON where the subcommand supports it
.RB ( audit ", " find-orphans ", " who-can ", " diff ", " export ", " list-backups ).
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress non-essential output. Data output is preserved; only progress /
advisory lines are silenced.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.
.SH COMMAND OVERVIEW
.TS
l l.
\fBCommand\fR	\fBPurpose\fR
grant (g)	Hierarchical grant with auto-snapshot
revoke (rv)	Soft revoke (remove user from managed group)
tree (t)	Colored permission tree, honors \fB-U USER\fR
backup (b)	Manual snapshot without changes
restore (r)	Full revert of a specific backup
undo (u)	Restore the most recent backup (one-shot revert)
history (h)	Backups whose target contains PATH (newest first)
copy-perms (cp)	Copy mode + owner + group (+ ACL) from SRC to DST
list-backups (ls)	List saved snapshots (filterable by \fB-p SUBSTR\fR)
prune-backups (prune)	Keep the N most recent backups
diff	Show what \fBrestore\fR would change
export	Dump a backup as text or JSON
chmod	chmod (octal + symbolic, setuid/setgid/sticky, \fB--reference\fR) with auto-snapshot
chown	chown (\fIuser\fR, \fIuser:group\fR, \fI:group\fR, numeric, \fB--reference\fR) with auto-snapshot
info (i)	One-shot summary of a path (type, owner, mode, ACLs)
audit (a)	Scan a tree for suspicious / matching permissions
find-orphans	Files whose UID / GID is not in /etc/passwd /group
who-can (w)	Reverse query: which users can read / write / exec a path
acl	POSIX ACL management (\fBgrant\fR|\fBrevoke\fR|\fBshow\fR|\fBstrip\fR)
preset (p)	Apply a named preset (\fBprivate\fR, \fBgroup-shared\fR, ...)
presets	List all presets with modes
completions	Emit shell completion script
.TE
.SH COMMANDS
.SS grant
.B janitor grant
.I PATH
.RB [ \-u
.IR USER ]
.RB [ \-g
.IR GROUP ]
.RB [ \-r ]
.RB [ \-w ]
.RB [ \-x ]
.RB [ \-a
.IR ACCESS ]
.RB [ \-L
.IR N ]
.RB [ \-R ]
.RB [ \-\-force\-all\-parents ]
.RB [ \-\-capture\-acl ]
.PP
Grant
.I USER
(or
.IR GROUP )
access to
.IR PATH .
A managed group is auto-created (named
.BI pm_tmp_ <owner>_<pathhash> )
unless
.B \-g
is given. Parents are opened with
.B \-\-x
only. Exactly one of
.B \-u
or
.B \-g
must be provided.
.PP
Access is specified either with the boolean flags
.BR \-r ", " \-w ", " \-x
or with the string
.BR \-a / \-\-access " \fIACCESS\fR" .
If no access flag is given, defaults to read-only. The two forms cannot be mixed.
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-user " \fIUSER\fR"
User to grant access to.
.TP
.BR \-g ", " \-\-group " \fIGROUP\fR"
Group to grant access to (instead of a user, or as the managed group when combined with
.BR \-u ).
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-read
Add the read bit.
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-write
Add the write bit.
.TP
.BR \-x ", " \-\-exec
Add the execute / traverse bit.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-access " \fIACCESS\fR"
String form of the bits above
.RB ( r ", " rw ", " rwx ).
Mutually exclusive with
.BR \-r / \-w / \-x .
.TP
.BR \-L ", " \-\-max\-level " \fIN\fR"
Limit how many parent directory levels above
.I PATH
are made traversable.
.TP
.BR \-R ", " \-\-recursive
Also apply the grant to every file and subdirectory under
.I PATH
(the directory tree is walked).
.TP
.B \-\-force\-all\-parents
Grant even if a parent is world-readable (normally a warning is emitted and the grant
continues; this flag suppresses the warning check).
.TP
.B \-\-capture\-acl
Include existing ACLs in the snapshot taken before the change, so
.B restore
also brings ACLs back (otherwise only mode and owner are captured).
.SS revoke
.B janitor revoke
.I PATH
.BR \-u
.I USER
.RB [ \-g
.IR GROUP ]
.PP
Remove
.I USER
from the managed group of
.IR PATH .
This is an
.B all-or-nothing
revoke: the user loses every bit of access that was granted via that group. The
file's mode, ACLs, and the managed group itself are untouched; other members of
the group keep their access.
.PP
For
.B bit-level
revocation use one of:
.TP
.B janitor chmod \fIMODE\fR \fIPATH\fR
Adjust traditional mode bits (also auto-snapshotted).
.TP
.B janitor acl revoke \fIPATH\fR \-u \fIUSER\fR
Remove a specific ACL entry.
.TP
.B janitor restore \fIID\fR
Undo a specific earlier grant exactly.
.SS tree
.B janitor tree
.I PATH
.RB [ \-L
.IR DEPTH ]
.RB [ \-P ]
.RB [ \-H
.IR SUBSTR ]
.RB [ \-U
.IR USER ]
.RB [ \-c
.IR auto|always|never ]
.RB [ \-A ]
.PP
Print a colored permission tree. With
.B \-U USER
entries are tinted green, yellow, or red depending on whether that user can
read, can traverse but not read, or is denied. With
.B \-A
a
.B +
marker is appended to the mode of entries that carry POSIX ACLs.
.SS chmod
.B janitor chmod
.I MODE PATH
.RB [ \-R ]
.RB [ \-A ]
.RB [ \-F\ FILE " | " \-\-reference\ FILE ]
.PP
Change the mode using octal or symbolic notation. An auto-snapshot is taken
first so the change is revertible via
.BR restore .
.PP
.B Note on naming.
.B janitor chmod
is not a wrapper around the coreutils
.BR chmod (1)
binary. It invokes the
.BR chmod (2)
syscall directly via
.BR std::fs::set_permissions .
The file-system effect is identical to POSIX chmod; the value added is the
automatic snapshot, lock-check, variadic paths,
.BR \-\-exclude ,
.BR \-\-stdin0 ,
.BR \-\-from\-file ,
and
.BR \-\-reference .
.PP
.B Octal forms
support the full 4-digit syntax with special bits:
.IP \(bu 2
\fB755\fR, standard rwxr-xr-x
.IP \(bu 2
\fB4755\fR, setuid (run as owner)
.IP \(bu 2
\fB2755\fR, setgid (inherit group, or run as group)
.IP \(bu 2
\fB1777\fR, sticky bit (directory: only owner can delete)
.IP \(bu 2
\fB6755\fR, setuid + setgid
.IP \(bu 2
\fB7777\fR, all special bits + rwxrwxrwx
.PP
.B Symbolic forms
accept comma-separated clauses of \fB[ugoa][+\-=][rwxXst]\fR, e.g.
.BR "u+rw,go\-w" ,
.BR "a+X"
(add x only to dirs/already-exec),
.BR "u+s"
(setuid),
.BR "g+s"
(setgid),
.BR "+t"
(sticky),
.BR "u\-s,g\-s,\-t"
(clear all special bits).
.PP
With
.B \-F
/ \fB\-\-reference FILE\fR the mode is copied from
.I FILE
and the
.I MODE
argument is ignored (pass
.B \-
as a placeholder).
.SS chown
.B janitor chown
.I SPEC PATH
.RB [ \-R ]
.RB [ \-A ]
.RB [ \-F\ FILE " | " \-\-reference\ FILE ]
.PP
Change owner/group.
.I SPEC
is one of
.IR user ", " user:group ", " :group ", " user:
(owner + that owner's primary group) or numeric
.IR UID:GID .
Symlinks are always handled with
.BR lchown (2);
targets are never followed, even under
.BR \-R .
With
.B \-F
/ \fB\-\-reference FILE\fR the owner and group are copied from
.IR FILE .
.PP
.B Note on naming.
.B janitor chown
is not a wrapper around the coreutils
.BR chown (1)
binary. It invokes the
.BR lchown (2)
syscall directly via
.BR libc::lchown .
The file-system effect is identical to
.BR "chown -h" ;
the value added is the automatic snapshot, lock-check, variadic paths,
.BR \-\-exclude ,
.BR \-\-stdin0 ,
.BR \-\-from\-file ,
and
.BR \-\-reference .
.SS info
.B janitor info
.I PATH
.RB [ \-U\ USER " | " \-\-for\-user\ USER ]
.PP
One-shot summary of a path: type, owner (name + uid), group, mode (octal +
symbolic, including setuid/setgid/sticky bits), size, mtime, symlink target,
and ACL entries. With
.B \-U
also prints the effective
.IR rwx
access for
.I USER
on that inode. Alias:
.BR i .
.SS backup
.B janitor backup
.I PATH
.RB [ \-R ]
.RB [ \-A ]
.PP
Snapshot current mode, owner, group, and (with
.BR \-A )
ACLs without making any change. Output includes the backup id.
.SS restore
.B janitor restore
.I BACKUP_ID
.PP
Revert a snapshot. Mode, owner, group, and (if captured) ACLs are restored
atomically per path. Symlinks use
.BR lchown (2).
.SS undo
.B janitor undo
.PP
Restore the most recent backup. Shortcut for looking up the newest snapshot
and running
.B restore
on it: an editor-style one-shot undo after any
.BR grant ", " chmod ", " chown ", or " acl
operation. Alias:
.BR u .
Combine with
.B \-\-dry\-run
to preview what would be reverted.
.SS list-backups
.B janitor list-backups
.RB [ \-p
.IR SUBSTR ]
.PP
List saved snapshots, most recent first. With
.B \-p
/ \fB\-\-path\fR only entries whose target path contains the given substring
are shown. With
.B \-\-json
produces an array of objects
.RI { id ", " timestamp ", " type ", " user ", " group ", " target ", " entries }.
.SS prune-backups
.B janitor prune-backups
.RB [ \-k
.IR N ]
.PP
Keep only the
.I N
most recent backups (default:
.BR 50 ).
.SS diff
.B janitor diff
.I BACKUP_ID
.PP
Show what
.B restore
of that backup would change versus the current state (mode, owner, group,
ACLs).
.SS export
.B janitor export
.I BACKUP_ID
.PP
Dump a backup as text or JSON (with
.BR \-j ).
.SS audit
.B janitor audit
.I PATH
.RB [ \-W ]
.RB [ \-r ]
.RB [ \-x ]
.RB [ \-s ]
.RB [ \-S ]
.RB [ \-t ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR USER ]
.RB [ \-g
.IR GROUP ]
.RB [ \-m
.IR OCTAL ]
.RB [ \-A ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-owner ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-group ]
.PP
Scan a tree for entries matching one or more security-relevant filters.
Multiple filters are AND-ed.
.TP
.BR \-W ", " \-\-world\-writable
Entries with the other+w bit set.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-world\-readable
Entries with the other+r bit set.
.TP
.BR \-x ", " \-\-world\-executable
Entries with the other+x bit set.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-setuid
setuid binaries.
.TP
.BR \-S ", " \-\-setgid
setgid binaries and directories.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-sticky
Sticky-bit directories.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-owner " \fIUSER\fR"
Only entries owned by
.IR USER .
.TP
.BR \-g ", " \-\-group " \fIGROUP\fR"
Only entries whose group is
.IR GROUP .
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-mode " \fIOCTAL\fR"
Only entries whose mode exactly equals
.IR OCTAL .
.TP
.BR \-A ", " \-\-has\-acl
Only entries that carry POSIX ACLs (\fB+\fR marker in
.BR "ls -l" ).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-owner
Only entries whose UID is not in
.IR /etc/passwd .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-group
Only entries whose GID is not in
.IR /etc/group .
.SS history
.B janitor history
.I PATH
.PP
List every backup whose target path contains
.IR PATH ,
newest first. With
.B \-\-json
emits an array of
.RI { id ", " timestamp ", " type ", " target ", " entries }
objects suitable for
.BR jq (1)
pipelines. Alias:
.BR h .
.SS copy-perms
.B janitor copy-perms
.I SRC
.I DST
.RB [ \-R ]
.RB [ \-A ]
.PP
Atomically copy mode + owner + group from
.I SRC
to
.IR DST ,
with an automatic snapshot of
.I DST
before the change.
.TP
.BR \-R ", " \-\-recursive
Also apply to every entry under
.IR DST .
.TP
.BR \-A ", " \-\-acl
Also copy POSIX ACLs. If
.I SRC
has no extended ACL, any ACL on
.I DST
is stripped so the two end up identical.
.PP
Symlinks in
.I DST
have their ownership updated (\fBlchown\fR) but their mode is left alone, matching
.BR chmod (1)
semantics. Alias:
.BR cp .
.SS find-orphans
.B janitor find-orphans
.I PATH
.PP
List files whose owner UID or group GID is not resolvable in
.I /etc/passwd
or
.IR /etc/group .
.SS who-can
.B janitor who-can
.I PATH
.PP
Report which known users (from
.IR /etc/passwd )
can read, write, or execute
.I PATH
based on the full parent traversal chain plus POSIX mode bits and group
memberships.
.B root
is always listed.
.SS acl
.B janitor acl
.IR grant | revoke | show | strip
.I PATH
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.PP
Wrap
.BR getfacl (1)
and
.BR setfacl (1)
with auto-snapshots.
.PP
.B acl grant
adds an ACL entry;
.B acl revoke
removes one;
.B acl show
prints the ACL in human-readable form; and
.B acl strip
removes all ACL entries (keeping traditional mode bits).
.B grant
and
.B revoke
accept:
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-user " \fIUSER\fR"
User entry to modify.
.TP
.BR \-g ", " \-\-group " \fIGROUP\fR"
Group entry to modify. Mutually exclusive with
.BR \-u .
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-w ", " \-x
Boolean access flags (combinable, any order).
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-access " \fIACCESS\fR"
String form of the bits (e.g.
.BR rwx ).
Mutually exclusive with
.BR \-r / \-w / \-x .
If none given, defaults to read-only.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-default
Operate on the default ACL (directories only). Default ACLs are inherited by
.I new
children created under the directory; existing children are not modified.
.TP
.BR \-R ", " \-\-recursive
Apply to every file and subdirectory under
.I PATH
(the tree is walked; combine with
.B \-d
to set the default ACL on every directory).
.PP
Examples:
.PP
.EX
# Alice rwx on a shared dir, and inherited by new children, applied to whole tree.
sudo janitor acl grant /srv/shared -u alice -rwx -d -R

# Read-only ACL entry for a group on a single file.
sudo janitor acl grant /etc/app/secret.conf -g auditors -r

# Remove a specific ACL entry.
sudo janitor acl revoke /srv/shared -u alice

# Inspect ACLs.
janitor acl show /srv/shared

# Remove every ACL entry from a tree (keep mode bits).
sudo janitor acl strip /srv/shared -R
.EE
.SS preset
.B janitor preset
.I NAME PATH
.RB [ \-R ]
.PP
Apply a named mode preset. See
.B janitor presets
for the full list. A snapshot is taken first; revert with
.B janitor restore <id>.
.TP
.BR \-R ", " \-\-recursive
Also apply the preset mode to every file and subdirectory under
.I PATH
(the whole tree is walked). Without
.BR \-R ,
only
.I PATH
itself is changed.
.PP
Examples:
.PP
.EX
# Lock down a single config file (600).
sudo janitor preset private-file /etc/app/secrets.yml

# Make /srv/team a group-shared dir (770) and recurse into its contents.
sudo janitor preset group-shared /srv/team -R

# Set a setgid directory so new children inherit the group (2775).
sudo janitor preset setgid-dir /srv/team

# Public-readable tree (755 dirs / 644 files -- pick the preset that matches).
sudo janitor preset public-read /srv/www -R
.EE
.PP
Typical presets:
.TP
.B private
700, owner only.
.TP
.B private-file
600.
.TP
.B group-shared
770, owner + group, no other.
.TP
.B group-read
750.
.TP
.B public-read
755.
.TP
.B public-file
644.
.TP
.B secret
400, read-only for owner, nobody else.
.TP
.B setgid-dir
2775, children inherit the group.
.TP
.B sticky-dir
1777,
.I /tmp
style.
.TP
.B secret-dir
500, readable & traversable by owner only (read-only).
.TP
.B exec-only
711, owner rwx; others may traverse but not list.
.TP
.B ssh-key
600, matches what
.BR sshd (8)
demands for private keys.
.TP
.B ssh-dir
700, for
.IR ~/.ssh .
.TP
.B config
640, config readable by the owner's group.
.TP
.B log-file
640, log readable by owner + group.
.TP
.B systemd-unit
644, matches the expected mode for
.IR /etc/systemd/system/*.service .
.TP
.B read-only
444, readable by everyone and writable by no one.
.TP
.B no-access
000, a "panic button" to freeze a path until it is investigated.
.SS completions
.B janitor completions
.I SHELL
.PP
Emit a shell completion script for
.IR bash ", " zsh ", " fish ", " powershell ", or " elvish .
.SH WORKFLOWS
.SS Inspecting a single path
One command for "what is going on with this file?":
.PP
.RS
.EX
# Type, owner, group, mode (octal + symbolic), setuid/setgid/sticky,
# size, mtime, symlink target, and ACLs -- all in one view.
janitor info /usr/bin/sudo

# Also show the effective rwx access for user alice.
janitor info /srv/app/config.yml -U alice
.EE
.RE
.SS Granting access to a shared project directory
A team of developers needs rwx access to
.I /srv/app
without the project becoming world-readable.
.PP
.RS
.EX
# 1. Create a team group if one does not exist.
sudo groupadd devs
sudo usermod -aG devs alice
sudo usermod -aG devs bob

# 2. Set the group on the directory tree and give it rwx, owner untouched.
sudo janitor chown :devs /srv/app -R
sudo janitor preset group-shared /srv/app -R

# 3. Make new files inherit the group and a sane mode.
sudo janitor preset setgid-dir /srv/app -R
sudo janitor acl grant /srv/app -g devs -rwx -d -R
.EE
.RE
.PP
Any developer can now create files under
.I /srv/app
that are automatically group-owned by
.B devs
and rwx-accessible to the group, without being visible to other system users.
.SS One-off access to a nested file
Auditor Carol needs read access to
.I /var/backups/db/dump.sql
for one afternoon, without exposing the rest of
.IR /var/backups .
.PP
.RS
.EX
# Grant (default is read-only), take note of the backup id it prints.
sudo janitor grant /var/backups/db/dump.sql -u carol -r
# ... auditor does her work ...

# Full revert when she's done.
sudo janitor ls | head -1        # newest-first list, one line per backup
sudo janitor restore <ID>
.EE
.RE
.PP
Siblings in
.I /var/backups
and
.I /var/backups/db
remained invisible throughout; Carol could
.BR cat (1)
the dump file but not list the directories.
.SS Auditing a server before handover
.PP
.RS
.EX
# World-writable, setuid, setgid, and sticky-bit surprises.
sudo janitor audit / -W -s -S -t --json | jq

# Files whose owners no longer exist.
sudo janitor find-orphans / --json

# Who exactly can read /etc/shadow today?
janitor who-can /etc/shadow

# Files with unexpected POSIX ACLs.
sudo janitor audit / -A --json | jq '.[].path'
.EE
.RE
.SS Safe chmod / chown with rollback
Every
.B chmod
and
.B chown
is snapshotted first:
.PP
.RS
.EX
sudo janitor chmod 640 /etc/nginx/conf.d/site.conf
sudo janitor chown root:www-data /var/www -R

# Oops, wrong group? Find the latest backup id and revert it.
# `janitor ls` lists backups newest-first, one per line, with the id as
# the first whitespace-separated column; `head -1` picks the newest line
# and `awk '{print $1}'` extracts just the id:
sudo janitor ls | head -1                   # full line for a human
BID=$(sudo janitor ls | head -1 | awk '{print $1}')
sudo janitor restore "$BID"
.EE
.RE
.SS Deploying ACL-based permissions
.PP
.RS
.EX
# Give bob rwx on a shared dir, inherited by every new child.
sudo janitor acl grant /srv/shared -u bob -rwx -d -R

# Remove bob's ACL (keeps the default for new files).
sudo janitor acl revoke /srv/shared -u bob -R

# Nuke all ACLs, keep only the traditional mode bits.
sudo janitor acl strip /srv/shared -R
.EE
.RE
.SS Previewing before committing
Every mutating command supports
.BR \-n / \-\-dry\-run :
.PP
.RS
.EX
sudo janitor -n grant /srv/data/report.txt -u alice -r
sudo janitor -n chown alice:devs /srv/app -R
sudo janitor -n preset setgid-dir /srv/team -R
.EE
.RE
.SS Backup management
.PP
.RS
.EX
# List human-readable (newest first, one line per backup).
janitor ls

# Find the newest backup id programmatically (for scripting).
janitor ls | head -1 | awk '{print $1}'

# Or use the JSON form and jq, e.g. ids of every backup touching /srv.
janitor -j ls | jq -r '.[] | select(.target | startswith("/srv")) | .id'

# Diff a backup against the current state (shows exactly what restore would undo).
janitor diff <ID>

# Dump a backup as structured JSON (all original mode/owner/ACL triples).
janitor -j export <ID>

# Keep the 20 most recent backups, delete the rest.
sudo janitor prune -k 20

# Full revert of the most recent change in one line.
sudo janitor restore "$(sudo janitor ls | head -1 | awk '{print $1}')"
.EE
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES CATALOG
Every command the tool supports, with at least one example per flag
combination. All mutating commands snapshot first and can be reverted with
.B janitor undo
or
.BR "janitor restore " <id> .
.SS grant / revoke
.PP
.RS
.EX
sudo janitor grant  /srv/docs/secret.txt -u alice -r
sudo janitor grant  /srv/project         -u alice -r -w -R
sudo janitor grant  /srv/project         -g devs  -a rw -R
sudo janitor grant  /srv/docs            -u alice -x
sudo janitor -n grant /srv/project -u alice -rw -R   # dry-run
sudo janitor revoke /srv/project -u alice
.EE
.RE
.SS chmod
.PP
.RS
.EX
sudo janitor chmod 644  /etc/nginx/nginx.conf
sudo janitor chmod 755  /usr/local/bin/tool
sudo janitor chmod 4755 /usr/local/bin/suid-helper
sudo janitor chmod 2755 /srv/shared
sudo janitor chmod 1777 /srv/tmp
sudo janitor chmod 6755 /usr/local/bin/suid-sgid
sudo janitor chmod u+rwx,g=rx,o= /srv/private
sudo janitor chmod a+X  /srv/project -R
sudo janitor chmod -F /etc/ssh/sshd_config /etc/ssh/sshd_config.bak
.EE
.RE
.SS chown
.PP
.RS
.EX
sudo janitor chown alice        /srv/alice
sudo janitor chown alice:devs   /srv/project -R
sudo janitor chown :devs        /srv/project
sudo janitor chown alice:       /srv/alice
sudo janitor chown 1000:1000    /srv/legacy
sudo janitor chown -F /etc/passwd /srv/new-file
.EE
.RE
.SS info
.PP
.RS
.EX
janitor info /etc/shadow
janitor info /etc/shadow -U alice
janitor -j info /srv/project | jq
.EE
.RE
.SS audit
.PP
.RS
.EX
janitor audit / -W              # world-writable
janitor audit / -r              # world-readable
janitor audit / -x              # world-executable
janitor audit / -s              # setuid
janitor audit / -S              # setgid
janitor audit / -t              # sticky-bit directories
janitor audit / -A              # entries with POSIX ACLs
janitor audit / -m 777          # exact-mode
janitor audit / -o alice        # owner
janitor audit / -g devs         # group
janitor audit / --no-owner      # orphan UID
janitor audit / --no-group      # orphan GID
janitor audit /srv -W -s        # AND filters
janitor --json audit / -W | jq -r '.[].path'
.EE
.RE
.SS find-orphans / who-can
.PP
.RS
.EX
janitor find-orphans /home
janitor who-can /etc/shadow
janitor -j who-can /etc/shadow | jq '.write'
.EE
.RE
.SS acl
.PP
.RS
.EX
sudo janitor acl grant  /srv/project -u alice -rw -R
sudo janitor acl grant  /srv/project -g devs  -rwx -d
sudo janitor acl revoke /srv/project -u alice
sudo janitor acl show   /srv/project
sudo janitor acl strip  /srv/project -R
.EE
.RE
.SS tree
.PP
.RS
.EX
janitor tree /srv/project
janitor tree /srv/project -L 3
janitor tree /srv/project -U alice
janitor tree /srv/project -A
janitor tree /srv/project -H /srv/project/secret.txt
janitor tree /srv/project -P
.EE
.RE
.SS preset
.PP
.RS
.EX
sudo janitor preset private       ~/.gnupg -R
sudo janitor preset private-dir   ~/.config
sudo janitor preset private-file  ~/.netrc
sudo janitor preset group-shared  /srv/team  -R
sudo janitor preset group-read    /srv/docs  -R
sudo janitor preset public-read   /srv/www   -R
sudo janitor preset public-file   /var/www/index.html
sudo janitor preset sticky-dir    /srv/tmp
sudo janitor preset setgid-dir    /srv/project -R
sudo janitor preset secret        /etc/secret.key
sudo janitor preset secret-dir    /root/secrets
sudo janitor preset exec-only     /srv/drop
sudo janitor preset ssh-key       ~/.ssh/id_ed25519
sudo janitor preset ssh-dir       ~/.ssh
sudo janitor preset config        /etc/myapp.conf
sudo janitor preset log-file      /var/log/myapp.log
sudo janitor preset systemd-unit  /etc/systemd/system/myapp.service
sudo janitor preset read-only     /srv/release.tar.gz
sudo janitor preset no-access     /srv/quarantine -R
janitor presets
.EE
.RE
.SS copy-perms
.PP
.RS
.EX
sudo janitor copy-perms /etc/ssh/sshd_config /etc/ssh/sshd_config.bak
sudo janitor copy-perms /srv/template        /srv/new -R
sudo janitor copy-perms /srv/template        /srv/new -R -A
.EE
.RE
.SS Snapshots, history, undo, restore
.PP
.RS
.EX
sudo janitor backup /srv/project -R -A
sudo janitor list-backups
sudo janitor list-backups -p /srv/project
sudo janitor history      /srv/project
sudo janitor -j history   /srv/project | jq
sudo janitor diff     <id>
sudo janitor export   <id>
sudo janitor -j export <id>
sudo janitor restore  <id>
sudo janitor undo
sudo janitor prune-backups -k 20
.EE
.RE
.SS Shell completions
.PP
.RS
.EX
janitor completions bash       | sudo tee /etc/bash_completion.d/janitor
janitor completions zsh        > ~/.zsh/completions/_janitor
janitor completions fish       > ~/.config/fish/completions/janitor.fish
janitor completions powershell > janitor.ps1
janitor completions elvish     > janitor.elv
.EE
.RE
.SH PERMISSION MODEL
For a file
.I /a/b/c/target
a grant walks the chain
.IR /a ", " /a/b ", " /a/b/c ", " /a/b/c/target .
For every ancestor directory, the group is set to the managed group and the
group-triad mode bits become exactly
.B \-\-x
(numerically: group-mode bits 1). Siblings in each ancestor are not touched;
they stay invisible to users who are only members of the managed group.
.PP
On the target itself, the requested bits are OR-ed into the group triad and
the group is set to the managed group.
.PP
Granting access to a world-readable target (o+r set) emits a warning,
because in that state the grant is purely advisory: every user on the box
could already read the file.
.SS find
.B janitor find
.I PATH
[\fB\-m\fR \fIOCTAL\fR] [\fB\-W\fR] [\fB\-r\fR] [\fB\-x\fR] [\fB\-s\fR] [\fB\-S\fR] [\fB\-t\fR] [\fB\-o\fR \fIUSER\fR] [\fB\-g\fR \fIGROUP\fR] [\fB\-A\fR] [\fB\-E\fR \fIGLOB\fR] [\fB\-0\fR]
.PP
Read-only permission-aware search. Prints one path per line, or NUL-separated with
\fB\-0\fR. Pipes cleanly into \fBjanitor chmod \-\-stdin0\fR.
.SS explain
.B janitor explain
.I PATH
[\fB\-U\fR \fIUSER\fR]
.PP
Human-readable verdict on whether USER can read / write / execute PATH.
Walks the full parent chain, checks traversal bits, group membership, and
ownership, and prints a single summary line plus annotated per-ancestor table.
Alias: \fBe\fR.
.SS compare
.B janitor compare
.I A
.I B
[\fB\-R\fR]
.PP
Side-by-side diff of mode, owner, group, and ACL between A and B. With \-R
both trees are walked and any entry that differs is printed. Exit 0 when
identical, 1 when differences are found \- CI-friendly.
.SS lock / unlock / locks
.B janitor lock
.I PATH
[\fB\-r\fR \fIREASON\fR]
.PP
Mark PATH (and every descendant if PATH is a directory) as locked. Any
subsequent janitor mutation targeting a locked path fails with a clear error
referencing REASON. Locks persist across invocations in the backup directory.
\fBjanitor unlock\fR removes a lock; \fBjanitor locks\fR prints all active locks.
.SS policy
.B janitor policy apply
.I FILE
| \fBjanitor policy verify\fR \fIFILE\fR
.PP
Declarative YAML policy. The file shape is:
.EX
rules:
  \- path: /etc/myapp.conf
    mode: "0640"
    owner: root
    group: myapp
  \- path: /srv/app
    recursive: true
    preset: group-shared
    exclude: ["*.pyc", ".git"]
.EE
\fBapply\fR mutates the filesystem under one snapshot. \fBverify\fR prints drift
and exits 1 if anything differs.
.SS batch
.B janitor batch
.I FILE
.PP
Run many permission ops in one transaction (one snapshot, one undo). Each line
of FILE is \fBchmod MODE PATH\fR, \fBchown SPEC PATH\fR, or \fBpreset NAME PATH\fR.
Blank lines and lines beginning with \fB#\fR are ignored. Use \fB\-\fR for stdin.
.SS attr
.B janitor attr show|set-immutable|clear-immutable|set-append-only|clear-append-only
.I PATH
.PP
Thin wrapper around \fBchattr\fR(1) / \fBlsattr\fR(1). Refuses to run on locked
paths. Requires \fBe2fsprogs\fR to be installed.
.SH RELATIONSHIP TO COREUTILS
\fBjanitor chmod\fR and \fBjanitor chown\fR accept the exact same argument
syntax as the coreutils tools (octal, symbolic, \-R, \-\-reference). Every
invocation additionally records the prior state into a MessagePack snapshot,
so \fBjanitor undo\fR reverts the whole call. The behavior is a strict superset:
existing scripts work unchanged. Snapshots accumulate in the backup directory;
run \fBjanitor prune-backups \-\-keep N\fR periodically when using janitor for
high-volume scripted operations.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/janitor/backups/
Snapshot directory when run as root (mode 0700, root:root).
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/janitor/backups/
Snapshot directory when run as a normal user.
.TP
.I <backup-dir>/.janitor.lock
Advisory
.BR flock (2)
preventing concurrent mutations in the same directory.
.TP
.I <backup-dir>/<id>.mpk
One MessagePack file per backup.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Any error (bad input, permission denied, I/O error, snapshot invalid).
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted by SIGINT (Ctrl-C) during a long operation. Partial state is
possible; run
.B janitor list-backups
and
.B janitor restore
to recover.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
Non-root backup directory root (defaults to
.IR ~/.local/share ).
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
If set, disables colored tree output (same as
.BR "\-c never" ).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR chmod (1),
.BR chown (1),
.BR setfacl (1),
.BR getfacl (1),
.BR stat (1),
.BR find (1),
.BR namei (1),
.BR groupadd (8),
.BR gpasswd (1).
.SH AUTHORS
janitor is maintained by Tristram1337 at
.UR https://github.com/Tristram1337/janitor
.UE .
.SH BUGS
Report issues at
.UR https://github.com/Tristram1337/janitor/issues
.UE .
